content/blog/election_pa_2016_p2.md, before:

+++
tags = ["anaylsis", "politics"]
title = "An examination of 2016 Election Results in Pennsylvania - Part 2"
description = ""
slug = "election_2016_pa_p2"
date = "2017-04-04T19:20:37-08:00"
+++

*This is the second post in a two-part series, examining presidential election
results from Pennsylvania. If you haven't
read [Part 1]({{< relref "election_pa_2016_p1.md" >}}) yet, you should start
there.*

In my first post, we have examined the data for 2016 (and some from 2012) and
uncovered some interesting results on what Trump did right. Nevertheless, many
people (myself included and, arguably, a majority of the US population) were
surprised by the election results. At this point I became curious: should we
have been surprised? Was this apparent sweep truly unprecedented? After all, we
heard a lot about how this was the first year in a long time that Pennsylvania
"went red", but how did this year actually stack up against previous elections?

To shed some light on these questions, we can take a more comprehensive look at
data from previous elections. So, I gathered county-level results for every
presidential election in Pennsylvania since 1996[^5], and registration data
since 2000. In this post, we re-examine several of the metrics discussed in Part
1 for previous elections, to see if there are larger trends that have been at
play in Pennsylvania elections.

<!--
Unlike part 1, which had more of a direct
narrative for the data presented, this post is a bit more spread out, presenting
several disparate results I found interesting. Also, this analysis is
necessarily more open-ended, because as we look backwards, demographic and other
external trends play larger roles in the data, which I haven't accounted for, so
I'm reticent to draw any conclusions from this data alone.
!-->
## Historical Election Results

We start with a look at the voting results from all elections since 1996.

{{< fig src="/img/election_16/pa/hist_results.png" >}} Fig 1. Three different
ways of visualizing the normalized marginal votes by county from elections
1996-2016: Tukey boxplots (left), on a map (center) and as stacked bar charts,
by candidate (right). {{< /fig >}}

While it's tempting to see Trump's victory as an anomaly (the "first time in
recent history Pennsylvania has gone red" perspective), Figure 1 tells a more
nuanced story. Indeed, the first thing you should notice is the gradual yet
steady shift across the state towards the right since the 1996 election. From
this perspective, 2008 appears to be the anomaly. It's the only election when
the distribution of marginal votes actually shifted slightly back to the
left. To achieve this, Obama won an extraordinary number of additional marginal
votes while McCain lost around 100,000. Every other year, we see the number of
marginal votes for Republicans steadily rising while Democrats maintain. In
2016, Trump managed to make two elections' worth of gains in one, and how he did
that was the focus of the first part of this series.

This trend to the right is reinforced by examining flipped counties. With the
exception of Chester county in 2016, 2008 is the only year since 1996 when any
county flipped Democrat. That means that since 1996, a net of 17 counties have
flipped from voting Democrat (in 1996) to Republican (in 2016).

{{< fig src="/img/election_16/pa/hist_d_results.png" >}} Fig 2. Visualizing
changes in normalized marginal votes for years 1996-2016 with: Tukey boxplots
(left) and on a map (right). In each map, every county is colored according to
its shift in normalized marginal votes from the previous year. Counties in which
votes shifted away from the winning candidate have been shaded. {{< /fig >}}

I provide Figure 2 simply because it is the clearest way of seeing how
widespread the shift to the right has been in the state, even amongst counties
which continue voting Democrat. Also, I found it surprising how most of the
counties exhibit shifts of >3% every year, and most often in the same direction
for each election.

{{< fig src="/img/election_16/pa/results_IV_years.png" >}} Fig 3. Plotting
percentage of votes for independent candidates (left) and its difference
(right) from the elections in 1996-2016. {{< /fig >}}

Finally, we wrap up this section by looking at how the independent vote has
changed over the years. From Figure 3, we see two facts. First, although votes
for independent candidates rose in 2016, it was comparable to 2000 and is
totally dwarfed by 1996. Second, while votes for independent candidates
increased in every county in 2016, this shift is insignificant in scale when
compared with the shift in normalized marginal votes (seen in Figure 2).

### Historical Registration Data

Looking at results is one thing, but as we saw
in
[Part 1]({{< relref "election_pa_2016_p1.md#republicans-had-increased-representation" >}}),
looking at registration data can also be insightful. To start, let's look at how
the basic registration variables have changed over the years[^6].

{{% fig src="/img/election_16/pa/variables_dists_years.png" %}}
Fig 4. Distributions by year of (from left to right): total registered voters,
relative registered Republicans, and turnout. The second row shows how each
variable changed between elections. Change in registered voters is calculated as
the percent change over the last election. {{% /fig %}}

From Figure 4, note that the total number of registered voters has
remained somewhat stable in Pennsylvania since 2000. It rose by less than 10% in
most counties since 2000, and actually declined in many 2012.

Unsurprisingly, 2016 saw the highest turnout of the past 5 elections. However,
I'm surprised to see that turnout dropped in 2008 - it seemed with how many
extra MV Obama won, it would have been due at least in part to higher
turnout. Further indication of how anomalous 2008 really was.

Finally, if we compare Figure 4 with Figure 2, it seems that the change in
relative Republican registrations has varied similarly to the change in
normalized marginal votes for each election. But the shifts in relative
Republican registrations are much less pronounced. Let's see just how the two
variables correlate.

{{% fig src="/img/election_16/pa/dvd_vs_drd_years.png" %}} Fig 5. Plots change
in relative Republican registrations against change in normalized marginal votes
for each county in each election. Points are colored according to the party of
the winning in that county in that election (red=Republicans,
blue=Democrats). {{% /fig %}}

As Figure 5 indicates, the variables are indeed positively correlated, matching
our intution above. I find it interesting how the 2008 and 20016 distributions
are distributed over a wider range, while 2004 and 2012 are much more condensed
around the origin. It's also remarkable how few counties exhibit opposing shifts
(shift positive in registrations but negative in votes, or vice versa). While this
is typical of correlated variables, I'm still surprised by how few counties fall
in the second or fourth quadrants of the plots.

Also, as we noted above, the shift in votes is generally of a higher magnitude
than the shift in registrations. I guess both are somewhat intuitive, but
together they suggest that we might be able to assemble a primitive estimator
for election results by looking at how registrations shifted since the previous
election. But I leave that for future exploration.

{{% fig src="/img/election_16/pa/registration_changes_years.png" %}}
Fig 6. Visualizing how the changes in registered voters and relative Republican
registrations between elections are distributed geographically (top) and along
the two axes (bottom). {{% /fig %}}

Finally, I wanted to explore how changes in total registrations and relative
Republican registrations jointly varied, because I was curious if there was any
relation between the two (perhaps as a result of voter suppression/purging,
etc.) In Figure 6, each point plotted in the bottom row corresponds to a county
from the map above, and every county is colored according to the discretized 2D
colormap on the right. The legend in the bottom right gives a general way of
interpreting the plots based on which quadrant each county is in. For example,
counties in the upper left quadrant experienced a net loss of registrations but
a shift towards a larger percentage of voters registered Republican, meaning
that there must have been a net loss of registered Democrats.

One thing that's apparent from the figure is that the shifts are not strongly
correlated across the state. However, it is interesting that the southwestern
counties are the only ones to consistently see increases in relative percentage
of Republicans registered, while the southeastern counties have only gotten more
Democrat-leaning in registrations.

### Summary of all Data, by County
<!-- Pulling it all Together !-->

{{% fig src="/img/election_16/pa/largest_cities_counties_years.png" %}}
Fig 7. Visualizing a subset of the examined variables for the counties home to
the 5 largest cities in Pennsylvania. {{% /fig %}}

Figure 7 presents the statistics for the counties where the 5 largest cities in
Pennsylvania (Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Allentown, Erie, and Reading)
reside. Nothing in particular jumps out at me, I just find it an interesting
visualization. It doesn't fit nicely on a single page, but I've also generated
the same plots for every county [here](/img/election_16/pa/counties_years.png).

A very obvious curiosity is if one can train a classifier on this data to
see if we can cluster the counties. I made some feeble attempts but didn’t find
any meaningful clusters.

## Closing Thoughts

In the wake of the 2016 election, we heard, in the media and on social media,
many exceptional stories about how all the polls were wrong and how surprising
the result was to many people. From that, many of us, myself included,
extrapolated that this election was anomolous - that something crazy happened
that's never happened before. And while that may have been true about the state
of the political climate in the US or the rhetoric of the campaigns, the data
doesn't support that conclusion. If anything, 2008 was the anomaly in recent
elections. As Part 1 concluded, Trump did many things to win, but that win was
just a hastening of an existing trend towards voting for Republican candidates
in Pennsylvania.

Producing this second post was challenging because going back in time provided a
whole variety of exciting ways to analyze the data. Every time I'd sit down to
answer one question, I'd wind up with 5 more questions to investigate
next. Choosing which parts of my analysis to pull out and clean up for this post
was a challenge, to say the least. As a result, the post is a bit more like a
collection of interesting figures than a cohesive narrative building to a
singular conclusion. Nevertheless, I hope you enjoyed it.

As I mentioned at the end of Part 1, all data and code for generating the
results and figures in this series, plus a lot of code and figures which didn't
make it into the posts, is available
on [Github](https://github.com/oderby/elections_2016). Someday, I'd like to come
back and continue this exploration, but if you're excited about it, please jump
in and let me know what you find!

*Edit: After I wrote most of this post, I
discovered [Data for Democracy](http://datafordemocracy.org/)
had
[released county-level election and registration data](https://medium.com/data-for-democracy/election-transparency-part-1-introducing-the-data-8258a1132315) from
the 2016 election for most states. And they are supposedly working on gathering
historical data as well. So it may be a lot easier to run this analysis on other
states in the future!*

***Thanks*** *to Karen Hao, Ryan Ko, Andrew Zukoski, Shane Leese and Lakshman
Sankar for reading drafts of this.*

[^5]: Why 1996? Somewhat arbitrary, although it gives us context from the last
    two party shifts in the presidency (Bush in '00 and Obama in '08). Also, the
    Pennsylvania state website only hosts results since 2000, so I had to get
    creative in my google searches. Finally, I hope one day to run this analysis
    for other states, and the farther I go back, the more data I'd need to
    format and parse to analyze other states (where I can even get it at
    all). Call me lazy.

[^6]: As mentioned before, 1996 is missing when we consider registration data
    because I couldn't find it at the county level.

Commit message:

final update on p1, make p2 a draft.

content/blog/election_pa_2016_p2.md, after:

+++
tags = ["anaylsis", "politics"]
title = "An examination of 2016 Election Results in Pennsylvania - Part 2"
description = "Part 2/2 analyzing 2016 and past presidential elections in Pennsylvania state"
slug = "election_2016_pa_p2"
date = "2017-04-08T19:20:37-08:00"
draft = true
+++

*This is the second post in a two-part series, examining presidential election
results from Pennsylvania. If you haven't
read [Part 1]({{< relref "election_pa_2016_p1.md" >}}) yet, you should start
there.*

In my first post, we have examined the data for 2016 (and some from 2012) and
uncovered some interesting results on what Trump did right. Nevertheless, many
people (myself included and, arguably, a majority of the US population) were
surprised by the election results. At this point I became curious: should we
have been surprised? Was this apparent sweep truly unprecedented? After all, we
heard a lot about how this was the first year in a long time that Pennsylvania
"went red", but how did this year actually stack up against previous elections?

To shed some light on these questions, we can take a more comprehensive look at
data from previous elections. So, I gathered county-level results for every
presidential election in Pennsylvania since 1996[^5], and registration data
since 2000. In this post, we re-examine several of the metrics discussed in Part
1 for previous elections, to see if there are larger trends that have been at
play in Pennsylvania elections.

<!--
Unlike part 1, which had more of a direct
narrative for the data presented, this post is a bit more spread out, presenting
several disparate results I found interesting. Also, this analysis is
necessarily more open-ended, because as we look backwards, demographic and other
external trends play larger roles in the data, which I haven't accounted for, so
I'm reticent to draw any conclusions from this data alone.
!-->
## Historical Election Results

We start with a look at the voting results from all elections since 1996.

{{< fig src="/img/election_16/pa/hist_results.png" >}} Fig 1. Three different
ways of visualizing the normalized marginal votes by county from elections
1996-2016: Tukey boxplots (left), on a map (center) and as stacked bar charts,
by candidate (right). {{< /fig >}}

While it's tempting to see Trump's victory as an anomaly (the "first time in
recent history Pennsylvania has gone red" perspective), Figure 1 tells a more
nuanced story. Indeed, the first thing you should notice is the gradual yet
steady shift across the state towards the right since the 1996 election. From
this perspective, 2008 appears to be the anomaly. It's the only election when
the distribution of marginal votes actually shifted slightly back to the
left. To achieve this, Obama won an extraordinary number of additional marginal
votes while McCain lost around 100,000. Every other year, we see the number of
marginal votes for Republicans steadily rising while Democrats maintain. In
2016, Trump managed to make two elections' worth of gains in one, and how he did
that was the focus of the first part of this series.

This trend to the right is reinforced by examining flipped counties. With the
exception of Chester county in 2016, 2008 is the only year since 1996 when any
county flipped Democrat. That means that since 1996, a net of 17 counties have
flipped from voting Democrat (in 1996) to Republican (in 2016).

{{< fig src="/img/election_16/pa/hist_d_results.png" >}} Fig 2. Visualizing
changes in normalized marginal votes for years 1996-2016 with: Tukey boxplots
(left) and on a map (right). In each map, every county is colored according to
its shift in normalized marginal votes from the previous year. Counties in which
votes shifted away from the winning candidate have been shaded. {{< /fig >}}

I provide Figure 2 simply because it is the clearest way of seeing how
widespread the shift to the right has been in the state, even amongst counties
which continue voting Democrat. Also, I found it surprising how most of the
counties exhibit shifts of >3% every year, and most often in the same direction
for each election.

{{< fig src="/img/election_16/pa/results_IV_years.png" >}} Fig 3. Plotting
percentage of votes for independent candidates (left) and its difference
(right) from the elections in 1996-2016. {{< /fig >}}

Finally, we wrap up this section by looking at how the independent vote has
changed over the years. From Figure 3, we see two facts. First, although votes
for independent candidates rose in 2016, it was comparable to 2000 and is
totally dwarfed by 1996. Second, while votes for independent candidates
increased in every county in 2016, this shift is insignificant in scale when
compared with the shift in normalized marginal votes (seen in Figure 2).

### Historical Registration Data

Looking at results is one thing, but as we saw
in
[Part 1]({{< relref "election_pa_2016_p1.md#republicans-had-increased-representation" >}}),
looking at registration data can also be insightful. To start, let's look at how
the basic registration variables have changed over the years[^6].

{{% fig src="/img/election_16/pa/variables_dists_years.png" %}}
Fig 4. Distributions by year of (from left to right): total registered voters,
relative registered Republicans, and turnout. The second row shows how each
variable changed between elections. Change in registered voters is calculated as
the percent change over the last election. {{% /fig %}}

From Figure 4, note that the total number of registered voters has
remained somewhat stable in Pennsylvania since 2000. It rose by less than 10% in
most counties since 2000, and actually declined in many 2012.

Unsurprisingly, 2016 saw the highest turnout of the past 5 elections. However,
I'm surprised to see that turnout dropped in 2008 - it seemed with how many
extra MV Obama won, it would have been due at least in part to higher
turnout. Further indication of how anomalous 2008 really was.

Finally, if we compare Figure 4 with Figure 2, it seems that the change in
relative Republican registrations has varied similarly to the change in
normalized marginal votes for each election. But the shifts in relative
Republican registrations are much less pronounced. Let's see just how the two
variables correlate.

{{% fig src="/img/election_16/pa/dvd_vs_drd_years.png" %}} Fig 5. Plots change
in relative Republican registrations against change in normalized marginal votes
for each county in each election. Points are colored according to the party of
the winning in that county in that election (red=Republicans,
blue=Democrats). {{% /fig %}}

As Figure 5 indicates, the variables are indeed positively correlated, matching
our intution above. I find it interesting how the 2008 and 20016 distributions
are distributed over a wider range, while 2004 and 2012 are much more condensed
around the origin. It's also remarkable how few counties exhibit opposing shifts
(shift positive in registrations but negative in votes, or vice versa). While this
is typical of correlated variables, I'm still surprised by how few counties fall
in the second or fourth quadrants of the plots.

Also, as we noted above, the shift in votes is generally of a higher magnitude
than the shift in registrations. I guess both are somewhat intuitive, but
together they suggest that we might be able to assemble a primitive estimator
for election results by looking at how registrations shifted since the previous
election. But I leave that for future exploration.

{{% fig src="/img/election_16/pa/registration_changes_years.png" %}}
Fig 6. Visualizing how the changes in registered voters and relative Republican
registrations between elections are distributed geographically (top) and along
the two axes (bottom). {{% /fig %}}

Finally, I wanted to explore how changes in total registrations and relative
Republican registrations jointly varied, because I was curious if there was any
relation between the two (perhaps as a result of voter suppression/purging,
etc.) In Figure 6, each point plotted in the bottom row corresponds to a county
from the map above, and every county is colored according to the discretized 2D
colormap on the right. The legend in the bottom right gives a general way of
interpreting the plots based on which quadrant each county is in. For example,
counties in the upper left quadrant experienced a net loss of registrations but
a shift towards a larger percentage of voters registered Republican, meaning
that there must have been a net loss of registered Democrats.

One thing that's apparent from the figure is that the shifts are not strongly
correlated across the state. However, it is interesting that the southwestern
counties are the only ones to consistently see increases in relative percentage
of Republicans registered, while the southeastern counties have only gotten more
Democrat-leaning in registrations.

### Summary of all Data, by County
<!-- Pulling it all Together !-->

{{% fig src="/img/election_16/pa/largest_cities_counties_years.png" %}}
Fig 7. Visualizing a subset of the examined variables for the counties home to
the 5 largest cities in Pennsylvania. {{% /fig %}}

Figure 7 presents the statistics for the counties where the 5 largest cities in
Pennsylvania (Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, Allentown, Erie, and Reading)
reside. Nothing in particular jumps out at me, I just find it an interesting
visualization. It doesn't fit nicely on a single page, but I've also generated
the same plots for every county [here](/img/election_16/pa/counties_years.png).

A very obvious curiosity is if one can train a classifier on this data to
see if we can cluster the counties. I made some feeble attempts but didn’t find
any meaningful clusters.

## Closing Thoughts

In the wake of the 2016 election, we heard, in the media and on social media,
many exceptional stories about how all the polls were wrong and how surprising
the result was to many people. From that, many of us, myself included,
extrapolated that this election was anomolous - that something crazy happened
that's never happened before. And while that may have been true about the state
of the political climate in the US or the rhetoric of the campaigns, the data
doesn't support that conclusion. If anything, 2008 was the anomaly in recent
elections. As Part 1 concluded, Trump did many things to win, but that win was
just a hastening of an existing trend towards voting for Republican candidates
in Pennsylvania.

Producing this second post was challenging because going back in time provided a
whole variety of exciting ways to analyze the data. Every time I'd sit down to
answer one question, I'd wind up with 5 more questions to investigate
next. Choosing which parts of my analysis to pull out and clean up for this post
was a challenge, to say the least. As a result, the post is a bit more like a
collection of interesting figures than a cohesive narrative building to a
singular conclusion. Nevertheless, I hope you enjoyed it.

As I mentioned at the end of Part 1, all data and code for generating the
results and figures in this series, plus a lot of code and figures which didn't
make it into the posts, is available
on [Github](https://github.com/oderby/elections_2016). Someday, I'd like to come
back and continue this exploration, but if you're excited about it, please jump
in and let me know what you find!

*Edit: After I wrote most of this post, I
discovered [Data for Democracy](http://datafordemocracy.org/)
had
[released county-level election and registration data](https://medium.com/data-for-democracy/election-transparency-part-1-introducing-the-data-8258a1132315) from
the 2016 election for most states. And they are supposedly working on gathering
historical data as well. So it may be a lot easier to run this analysis on other
states in the future!*

***Thanks*** *to Karen Hao, Ryan Ko, Andrew Zukoski, Shane Leese and Lakshman
Sankar for reading drafts of this.*

[^5]: Why 1996? Somewhat arbitrary, although it gives us context from the last
    two party shifts in the presidency (Bush in '00 and Obama in '08). Also, the
    Pennsylvania state website only hosts results since 2000, so I had to get
    creative in my google searches. Finally, I hope one day to run this analysis
    for other states, and the farther I go back, the more data I'd need to
    format and parse to analyze other states (where I can even get it at
    all). Call me lazy.

[^6]: As mentioned before, 1996 is missing when we consider registration data
    because I couldn't find it at the county level.
